Now, let's talk about segmentation problems.
Segmentation really stands out as far
as machine learning problems go with respect to medical images because it
potentially opens up a lot of interesting use cases as you have
seen from some of the content that we've presented so far.
At the same time, segmentations presents [inaudible]
challenges because it is not that easy to collect
ground truth for supervised machine learning problems that solve segmentation tasks.
Let's look at how people approach this problems and how can you approach this problems.
First, let's talk about segmentation problem statement.
What is segmentation?
In traditional computer vision,
segmentation is the problem of identifying exactly which pixels or voxels incase of
3D correspond to what's object or
semantic segmentation would be putting labels to this collections of voxels.
It would know that, for example,
this patch of voxels represents a person and the green patch of
voxels are presents a bicycle and the black one is the background.
When it comes to medical imaging and 3D medical imaging,
segmentation problems basically mean that you are
extracting three-dimensional shapes from 3D medical volume.
Sometimes the shapes can have anatomical meaning,
like in this image where you can see different lobes
of the lung being segmented and colored with different colors.
Sometimes the shapes might have some other meaning,
some clinical pathological meaning, like, for example,
different tissue types that constituted tumor.
Now, let's have Mason join us and talk about how machine learning methods for
segmentation can be used in a clinical context for solving some of the clinical problems.
Okay, you've got some basics of segmentation down.
Let's now talk about some use cases.
The first deals with quantitation of disease burden or
severity over time across multiple scans for a given patient.
This workflow lends itself well in oncology
where following the size of a tumor during treatment,
can be one important factor in determining whether treatment is working.
In current practice, tumor measurements are often performed in a rudimentary way,
with the largest measurement taken in three planes and reported as
three values often compared to the prior three measurements done on a more remote scan.
Automated segmentation opens the door to tracking volume over time,
which can be a much more precise way of following overall disease burden,
especially for irregularly shaped structures.
Volumetric measurements are not only useful when considered across multiple studies.
Volumes of structures can provide valuable diagnostic information
at a single time point when compared to age match controls.
For example, in Alzheimer's disease and other dementias,
the hippocampus is a structure which is heavily involved and having the data available to
see where a particular patient's volume falls with respect to age match cohorts,
can provide useful information about disease severity.
This example shows just that with segmentations of the left and right hippocampus,
which are normal in this case.
You will explore this problem more in the final project.
Radiation therapy planning is another task
which lends itself well to automated segmentation.
Radiation therapy planning is the process in which a team
consisted of radiation oncologists, radiation therapists,
medical physicist, and medical dosimetry's will plan
the appropriate radiation fields for a patient with cancer.
During this process, contours are drawn around the tumor volume undergoing treatment,
as well as critical structures that are to be avoided.
The process is often time-consuming,
especially if done in a completely manual sense.
Automated segmentation could potentially accelerate this process,
ideally resulting in an equally effective but more efficient treatment planning session.
The last use case invites us to think of
the possibilities that are beyond current human capability.
For example, radio genomics,
a relatively novel area of research which attempts to correlate the imaging features of
a particular disease and its various genetic or molecular features.
The imaging features are referred to as the imaging phenotype,
whereas the genetic or molecular features are referred to as the genomic phenotype.
Automated segmentation lends itself well to
such research as delineating the volume of tissue that's
required in analysis during the pipeline can be
tremendously labor-intensive if done manually for a larger dataset.
Having an automated pipeline would be of great value.